# Authenticate and Authorize Users

In this section, add the following application features:

* Sign up for a user account.
* Log in and out of an account.
* Post new videos.
* Share videos with other users.

This section also adds fine-grained access control to the Fauna database
resources. Users will only be able to view videos they have permission to
access. To achieve this you will leverage Fauna’s [attribute-based access
control](https://docs.fauna.com/fauna/current/cookbook/security/) (ABAC)
features.

## Add a Sign up page

1. Create a `src/app/signup` directory in your project.

1. Add a new file `src/app/signup/page.js`.

1. Open the file and add the following code.

    ```jsx
    // src/app/signup/page.js
    'use client'
    import { useRouter } from 'next/navigation';
    import { useState } from 'react';
    import styles from './page.module.css';

    export default function SignUp() {
      const [email, setEmail] = useState("");
      const [password, setPassword] = useState("");
      const router = useRouter();

      const handleEmailChange = (e) => {
        setEmail(e.target.value);
      };

      const handlePasswordChange = (e) => {
        setPassword(e.target.value);
      };

      const handleSubmit = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        // TODO - create user in Fauna
      };

      const redirectToLogin = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        router.push("/login")
      }

      return (
        <div className={styles.wrapContainer}>
          <h3 className={styles.h3}>Sign Up</h3>
          <form onSubmit={handleSubmit} className={styles.formStyle}>
            <label className={styles.label}>E-mail</label>
            <input type="email" value={email} onChange={handleEmailChange} required className={styles.inputStyle}/>
            <label className={styles.label}>Password</label>
            <input type="password" value={password} onChange={handlePasswordChange} required className={styles.inputStyle}/>
            <button type="submit" className={styles.button}>Submit</button>
          </form>

          <div className={styles.bottomContainer}>
            <p className={styles.p}>Already have an account?</p>
            <button onClick={redirectToLogin} className={styles.buttonSecondary}>Log In</button>
          </div>
        </div>
      );
    }
    ```

    👩🏻‍💻 *[link to code](https://github.com/fauna-labs/video-sharing/blob/806a6a1bb279f227a91dbd7d38f82215f8f40393/src/app/signup/page.js)*

    This code presents a form to capture user’s email and password for a sign-up process. It uses Next.js's `useRouter` hook to navigate between pages, and React's `useState` hook to manage the state of email and password inputs.

1. Save and close the `src/app/signup/page.js` file.

1. Create a new CSS file `src/app/signup/page.module.css` to style the component.

1. Add the CSS code in [this link](https://github.com/fauna-labs/video-sharing/blob/806a6a1bb279f227a91dbd7d38f82215f8f40393/src/app/signup/page.module.css).

1. Save and close the `page.module.css` file.

1. Restart your application with `npm run dev` command.

1. Visit [http://localhost:3000/signup](http://localhost:3000/signup) and make
   sure the **Sign Up** page displays.

    <img
    src="https://workshop-shadid.s3.amazonaws.com/cffqlx/1-user-authentification-signup.png"
    alt="Sign Up" style={{ width: '400px', height: 'auto' }}/>


## Add Fauna Credential Support

Commonly, authentication and authorization are implemented in the application
layer. Fauna centralizes these in the database. As a result, applications can
become database clients without needing to implement authentication or
authorization. In this section, you add a code to create a user document in
your Fauna `User` collection and Fauna `Credential` document.

The
[Credential](https://docs.fauna.com/fauna/current/reference/auth/credential/)
collection is a native Fauna collection that supports identity in Fauna. A
Fauna `Credential` combines a document `id` and a `password` typically to
uniquely identify a person, such as a user. A credential is one mechanism for
controlling access to a Fauna database and its resources.

1. Open the `src/app/signup/page.js` file.

1. Add a line to import the Fauna `Client`:

    ```jsx
    import { Client, fql } from 'fauna';
    ```

1. After the router declaration add code to connect to Fauna.

    ```jsx
    const client = new Client({
      secret: process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY
    });
    ```

1. Update the `handleSubmit` function to include the `Credential.create()`
   function.

    ```jsx
    const handleSubmit = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        client.query(fql`
            let user = User.create({ email: ${email} })
            Credential.create({ document: user, password: ${password} })
        `)
        .then((response) => {
            console.log('response', response.data)
        })
        .catch((error) => {
            console.log('error', error)
        })
    };
    ```

    The `handleSubmit` function runs on form submission. When the form is
    submitted, the code sends a Fauna Query Language (FQL) query via the
    `client` object to your Fauna database. This code adds a user with an
   `email` field to the `User` collection in your database. It also creates a
    `Credential` document for that user.  The `Credential` is created with the
    user document and the `password` the user provided.

1. Try signing up a new user in your app.

1. Open the Fauna dashboard and verify that the user was created in the `User`
   collection.

    ```jsx
    User.all()
    {
    data: [
      {
        id: "375337115543666756",
        coll: User,
        ts: Time("2023-09-08T21:23:37.090Z"),
        email: "mary@fauna.com"
          }
        ]
      }
    ```

In the next section,  you'll simplify this code with a Fauna function.

## Define a Function

A [User-Defined Function
(UDF)](https://docs.fauna.com/fauna/current/reference/schema_entities/function/)
is a Fauna feature that allows you to create custom functions in the database
layer. UDFs are written using FQL and, like stored procedures in SQL databases,
extend the functionality of the Fauna engine. UDFs are helpful for code
modularization, reusability, and applying additional security rules.

1. Log into your Fauna dashboard.

1. Open the dashboard shell.

1. Create a UDF called `Signup` in Fauna.

    ```jsx
    Function.create({
      name: "Signup",
      body: "(email, password) => {
        let user = User.create({ email: email })
        Credentials.create({ document: user, password: password })
      }",
      role: "server"
    })
    ```
    <img
    src="https://workshop-shadid.s3.amazonaws.com/cffqlx/2-user-authentification-function.png"
    alt="Function creation" style={{ width: '200px', height: 'auto' }}/>

    This new function replicates in your Fauna database, the functionality you
    implemented in the Next.js `handleSubmit` function. Notice that the
    function is added to your database resources in the dashboard's lower panel.

1. Open the `signup/page.js` file in your project.

1. Locate and update the `handleSubmit` code to use the `Signup` UDF.

    ```jsx
    const handleSubmit = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        client.query(fql`
            Signup(${email}, ${password})
        `)
        .then((response) => {
            console.log('response', response.data)
        })
        .catch((error) => {
            console.log('error', error)
        })
    };
    ```

1. Save and close the `signup/page.js` file.

1. Restart your app and try signing up again.

1. Verify a new user is in your `User` collection on Fauna.

## Add a Login Function

Now that users can sign up for the application, you need to add the ability to
log in.

1. Create an `app/login` directory in your project.

1. Add a `src/app/login/page.js` file and add the following code.

      ```jsx
      'use client'
      import { useRouter } from 'next/navigation';
      import { useState } from "react";
      import { Client, fql } from "fauna";
      import styles from '../signup/page.module.css';

      export default function Login() {
        const [email, setEmail] = useState("");
        const [password, setPassword] = useState("");
        const router = useRouter();
        const client = new Client({
          secret: process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY
        });

        const [invalidPassword, setInvalidPassword] = useState(false);

        const handleEmailChange = (e) => {
          setEmail(e.target.value);
        };

        const handlePasswordChange = (e) => {
          setPassword(e.target.value);
        };

        const handleSubmit = (e) => {
          e.preventDefault();
          // TODO: Query the database for the user with the given email and password
        };

        const redirectToSignup = (e) => {
          e.preventDefault();
          router.push("/signup")
        }

        return (
          <div className={styles.wrapContainer}>
            <h3 className={styles.h3}>Log In</h3>
            <form onSubmit={handleSubmit} className={styles.formStyle}>
              <label className={styles.label}>E-mail</label>
              <input type="email" value={email} onChange={handleEmailChange} required className={styles.inputStyle}/>
              <label className={styles.formStyle}>Password</label>
              <input type="password" value={password} onChange={handlePasswordChange} required className={styles.inputStyle}/>
              <button type="submit" className={styles.button}>Submit</button>
            </form>

            <div className={styles.bottomContainer}>
              <p className={styles.p}>Don't have an account?</p>
              <button onClick={redirectToSignup} className={styles.buttonSecondary}>Sign Up</button>
            </div>
          </div>
        );
      }
      ```

    This code creates a Next.js page route for login. The `login/page.js` file
    presents a login form to a user. The form uses React's `useState` hook to
    manage a user's email and password. The page also has a `handleSubmit`
    function to accept form the submission.

1. If necessary, restart your application with `npm run dev` command.

1. Visit [http://localhost:3000/login](http://localhost:3000/login) to verify
   the login page displays as expected.

    <img
    src="https://workshop-shadid.s3.amazonaws.com/cffqlx/3-user-authentification-login.png"
    alt="Log In" style={{ width: '400px', height: 'auto' }}/>

## Retrieve User Data from Fauna

In this section, you again use a Fauna UDF to match the `email` and `password`
a user submits to `User` and `Credential` in Fauna.

1. Open the `src/app/login/page.js` file.

1. Update the `handleSubmit` function.

    ```jsx
    const handleSubmit = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        client.query(fql`
            let user = User.where(.email == ${email}).first()
            let cred = Credentials.byDocument(user).login(${password})
            let result = {
                user: user,
                cred: cred
            }
            result
        `)
        .then((response) => {
            console.log('response', response.data)
        })
        .catch((error) => {
            console.log('error', error)
            setInvalidPassword(true)
        })
      };
    ```

    The `email` is used to match a `User` document. In turn, the user document
    in combination with the provided password matches a `Credential` in Fauna.
    The result is the user is authorized.

1. Update the `handleSubmit` function to store user data after a successful
   login.

    ```jsx
    const handleSubmit = (e) => {
        e.preventDefault();
        client.query(fql`
            let user = User.where(.email == ${email}).first()
            let cred = Credentials.byDocument(user).login(${password})
            let result = {
                user: user,
                cred: cred
            }
            result
        `)
        .then((response) => {
            if (!response.data?.user) {
                setInvalidPassword(true)
            }
            const userInfo = {
                email: response.data.user.email,
                id: response.data.user.id,
                key: response.data.cred.secret
            }
            window.localStorage.setItem("video-sharing-app", JSON.stringify(userInfo));
            router.push("/")
        })
        .catch((error) => {
            console.log('error', error)
            setInvalidPassword(true)
        })
      };
    ```

      Note, you store all the user information in the local storage. This
      includes saving the secret that is returned after the user logs in. Fauna
      can identify a user based on this secret. If you want to make an
      authenticated request, you can pass in this secret instead of the key
      saved in the environment variable `NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY`.

1. Try logging in with a user to make sure that the user information is saved in the local storage of your browser.

        <img
    src="https://workshop-shadid.s3.amazonaws.com/cffqlx/4-user-authentification-local-storage.png"
    alt="Local Storage" style={{ width: '600px', height: 'auto' }}/>


## Authorize Video Access

At this point, unauthenticated users can sign up and log in to our app. An
unauthenticated user has limited permissions and can only call the `Login` and
`Signup` UDFs in the database. In this section, you add the permission logic
that will allow users to fetch videos they created or that were explicitly
shared with them. Not other videos should be accessible. Implementing this
change requires that you to create a
[Role](https://docs.fauna.com/fauna/current/reference/auth/role/) in your Fauna
database.

1. Open your database in the Fauna dashboard.

1. In the web shell run the following FQL code to create a new `Role` called `NotLoggedIn`.

    ```jsx
    Role.create({
      name: "NotLoggedIn",
      privileges: [
        {
          resource: "User",
          actions: {
            read: true,
            create: true
          }
        },
        {
          resource: "Credential",
          actions: {
            read: true
          }
        },
        {
          resource: "Token",
          actions: {
            create: true
          }
        }
      ]
    })
    ```

    Fauna has native roles and custom roles. Custom roles are roles you create.
This custom role has a `privileges` array. This array defines the specified
permission for this role. A user with this role can only register for an
account and log in to that account.

1. Create a new secret for this role by running the following FQL code in the web shell.

    ```jsx
    Key.create({ role: "NotLoggedIn" })
    ```

    Running this generates a key secret like the following:

    ```jsx
    {
      id: "375544037439963204",
      coll: Key,
      ts: Time("2023-09-11T04:12:33.225Z"),
      role: "NotLoggedIn",
      secret: "fnAFNjNP9SAadfRLbKrr_a5BTcz-MQjx7hymo7vCjo"
    }
    ```

1. Open the `.env` file in your project.

1. Replace the existing server key in `NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY` environment
   variable with this new key.

   This change ensures that any unauthenticated users in your application will
   get the `NotLoggedIn` role. An unauthenticated user is not allowed to create
   a video.

## Test the NotLoggedIn Role

1. Log in as a user in your app.

1. Trying to [record a new video]((http://localhost:3000/record)) on this
    `http://localhost:3000/record`.

    This should fail.

1. Open the browser's Developer Tolls and navigate to the network tab.

            <img
    src="https://workshop-shadid.s3.amazonaws.com/cffqlx/5-user-authentification-insufficient-privilege.png"
    alt="Insufficient privileges" style={{ width: '600px', height: 'auto' }}/>

    This error is is expected because the API request uses a key associated
    with the `NotLoggedIn` role, and that role doesn’t have privileges to
    create a video. The error should state there are `Insufficient privileges`
    to perform the operation.


## Give LoggedIn Privileges

In this section, you create a role for authenticated users and explicitly
define what `privileges` an authenticated user has.

1. Go back to your database on Fauna and open the web shell.

1. Create a new role by running the following FQL code.

    ```jsx
    Role.create({
      name: "LoggedIn",
      privileges: [
        {
          resource: "User",
          actions: {
            read: true,
          }
        },
        {
          resource: "Video",
          actions: {
            read: true,
            create: true,
            write: true
          }
        }
      ],
      membership: [
        {
          resource: "User"
        }
      ]
    })
    ```

    This query creates a new `LoggedIn` role with a `membership` array. The
membership is set to the `User` collection. This means the `User` collection is
the primary collection used to generate the secret key for this role.

1. Open the `src/app/record/page.js` file.

1. Update the code so that the Fauna client initialization uses the logged-in
   user’s key from local storage.

    ```jsx
    // src/app/record/page.js
    'use client'
    import Link from 'next/link';
    import styles from './recorder.module.css';
    import Recorder from './Recorder';
    import { Client, fql } from "fauna";

    export default function Record() {

        const userInfo = JSON.parse(localStorage?.getItem("video-loggedInUser"));
        const client = new Client({
            secret: userInfo ? userInfo.key : process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY,
        });

        const handleRecordedVid = async (blob) => {
            try {
                const newVid = await client.query(fql`
                    let user = User.byId(${userInfo.id})
                    Video.create({
                        title: ${new Date().toISOString()},
                        author: user
                    })
                `)
                console.log('newVid', newVid)

                await fetch(`https://backend.maryvide.workers.dev/${newVid.data.id}`, {
                    method: 'PUT',
                    headers: {
                        'Content-Type': 'video/webm',
                        'X-Custom-Auth-Key': 'supersecret'
                    },
                    body: blob
                })
            } catch (error) {
                console.log('error', error)
                alert('There was an error uploading your video')
            }
        }
        return (
            <div className={styles.mainWrap}>
                <Link href='/'><span className={styles.home}>🏠 Home</span></Link>
                <h1>Record Video</h1>
                <Recorder onRecordedChunks={handleRecordedVid} />
            </div>
        )
    }
    ```

1. Save and close the `src/app/record/page.js` file.

1. Test your code by logging in with a new user and creating a new video.

    You should not receive the error from Fauna.

1. Open the `Video` collection in Fauna.

    You should see `Video` collection members for each recording you made.


## Improve the User Experience

You have added basic authentication to the app. In this section, you add
front-end authentication guards to improve the user experience. You also give
the users a way to log out by adding a Logout button to both the **Record** and
**Home** page. When a user logs out, the app should clear the user information from the local storage.

1. Open the `src/app/record/page.js` file.

1. Replace the content of the file with the following:

    ```jsx
    // src/app/record/page.js
    'use client'
    import Link from 'next/link';
    import { useRouter } from 'next/navigation';
    import styles from './recorder.module.css';
    import Recorder from './Recorder';
    import { Client, fql } from "fauna";
    import { useEffect } from 'react';

    export default function Record() {
        const userInfo = JSON.parse(localStorage?.getItem("video-sharing-app"));
        const router = useRouter();

        useEffect(() => {
            if (!userInfo) {
                alert('You must be logged in to record a video')
                router.push("/login")
            }
        }, [])

        const client = new Client({
            secret: userInfo ? userInfo.key : process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY,
        });

        const handleRecordedVid = async (blob) => {
            try {
                const newVid = await client.query(fql`
                    Video.create({
                        title: ${new Date().toISOString()}
                    })
                `)
                console.log('newVid', newVid)

                await fetch(`https://backend.shadidhaque2014.workers.dev/${newVid.data.id}`, {
                    method: 'PUT',
                    headers: {
                        'Content-Type': 'video/webm',
                        'X-Custom-Auth-Key': 'supersecret'
                    },
                    body: blob
                })
            } catch (error) {
                console.log('error', error)
                alert('There was an error uploading your video')
            }
        }
      const logout = () => {
          window.localStorage.removeItem("video-sharing-app");
          router.push("/login")
      }

      return (
          <div className={styles.mainWrap}>
              <div className={styles.buttonWrapper}>
                  <button onClick={logout}>Logout</button>
              </div>
              <Link href='/'><span className={styles.home}>🏠 Home</span></Link>
              <h1>Record Video</h1>
              <Recorder onRecordedChunks={handleRecordedVid} />
          </div>
      )
    ```

    👩‍💻 *[link to code](https://github.com/fauna-labs/video-sharing/blob/d67d2f38603468872f3b9b00fbc856555bdafb32/src/app/record/page.js)*

1. Save and close the `src/app/record/page.js` file.

1. Open the `src/app/page.js` page and replace the contents with the following:

    ```jsx
    'use client'
    import { useState, useEffect } from "react";
    import { Client, fql } from "fauna";
    import { useRouter } from 'next/navigation';

    export default function Home() {

      const router = useRouter();

      const client = new Client({
        secret: process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_FAUNA_KEY
      });

      useEffect(() => {
        client.query(fql`
          User.all()
        `).then((response) => {
          console.log('response', response.data.data)
        })
      }, []);

      const logout = () => {
        window.localStorage.removeItem("video-sharing-app");
        router.push("/login")
      }

      return (
        <>
          <button onClick={logout}>Logout</button>
          <div>
            Hello World
          </div>
        </>

      );
    }
    ```

    👩‍💻 *[link to code](https://github.com/fauna-labs/video-sharing/blob/d67d2f38603468872f3b9b00fbc856555bdafb32/src/app/page.js)*

1. Save and close the `src/app/page.js` page

1. Reload or restart your application to test your changes.
